# nicschumann.co

I turned 30 years old in February of 2021. I'm making this personal website more as a process to reflect on what I've done over the past 10 years or so. As a side effect, I hope to make an artifact that's interesting to look at, communicates information about what I can do and what I think is important, and is fun to work on. Doing creative work is hard, in part because your aspirations, your taste, and your vision (in other words, your reach), often exceeds your ability to execute (your grasp). Over the past 10 years, I've learned how to execute on a great many technical things, developed my own standards for what I think is acceptable and what isn't, and become friends and collaborators with people and institutions I look up to.

My work has always been very collaborative. I can't think of many public projects I've participated in that have been solely my creation. I think the idea of sole authorship is misleading anyway; most work is generated in a context and with the support of a community. These people and systems are authors, too, whether or not they claim that authorship. This website will highlight that perspective, by thoroughly honoring the references and inputs that support the projects I catalog.

My work has also always cut across a lot of practices and disciplines, both on the engineering end and on the design end. For that reason, I'm not sure of it makes sense to group projects by discipline at a high level. I almost feel like it makes the most sense to allow the projects to be accessed by *collaborator*. I may try this.

## Cards

A card metaphor for the content on the site makes a lot of sense to me, for multiple reasons:

1. Cards are flat, short, and have multiple types.
1. Cards can be sequenced and grouped in multiples ways.
1. Cards suggest both games and systems.
1. Cards can be engaged with at multiple resolutions.
1. Cards can be shuffled.
1. Cards can be sorted.
1. Cards can be held in a deck. The deck can be drawn from.

## The Deck

This is a list of possible cards I might add to the deck.

- **Adversarial Alphabets**. Federico Pérez Villoro and I wrote about the dynamics of Optical Character Recognition and speculated OCR-resistant letterforms for Source Type, an online journal of specualtive type design. Conceived as a three-part series, the first part is due to be released in spring 2021. Collaborators: Federico Perez Villoro, Ben Schwartz, Laurenz Brunner, Source Type.

- **Psych Sim**. My friend and colleague Cem Eskinazi released his first typeface **Name** through Occupant Fonts in spring of 2021. It's a complex and energetic Scotch-serif design with psychedelic vibes and a very large set of widths. To mark the release and give the font an online presense, I responded to Cem's work by designing and implementing a psychedelic fluid-mechanics-based simulator and drawing tool. The tool attempts to capture the energy that **Name** captures in its design.

- **Immeasurability**. I designed and built a magnet-and-motor-based physical computing system for architecture studio AD–WO's contribution to the show *Reconstructions: Architecture and Blackness in America*. The show was on view at MoMA in New York City, USA from February 27 to May 31, 2021. Originally commissioned in 2019, the show evolved significantly during COVID-19, requiring all of us to find new ways to work together. As part of a group of collaborators building a complex physical and computational structure, we navigated scope changes, COVID-travel, and several last-minute surprises to ultimately install a structure at MoMA that we're all quite proud off. Collaborators: Emanuel Admassu, Jen Wood, Bednark Studio, MoMA.

- **Variable Font Visualizer**. A lot of type designers love variable fonts, a font format that allows for a typeface's design space to be represented in single font file. Variable fonts allow for interpolation between a typeface's masters by using a delta-encoding scheme from base geometry together with fairly simple rules for calculating weighted combinations of deltas. In other words, variable font files represent a whole family of fonts in a single file by lerping between masters. However, sometimes you don't want your interpolations to be continuous across your designspace; you want specific regions where the glyph geometry "jumps" discontinuously. Historically, these rules have been specified in text files and added to final compiled binaries through a process at the command line. At Occupant Fonts, we built a tool that allows us to carve up a font's design space and specify families of discontinuities visually. The tool then outputs rules for the designer to use in the variable font compilation process. Currently for internal use at Occupant Fonts. Collaborators: Marie Otsuka, Occupant Fonts.

- **Occupant Fonts**. In 2020, I joined Occupant Fonts as a Project Manager, Tool and Font Engineer, and Researcher. I've had the privilege of working with some great type designers and wonderful people: Cyrus Highsmith, Cem Eskinazi, June Shin, and Marie Otsuka. Occupant was a roughly 3 year old company when I joined and was in the process of experiencing its first set of growing pains ~ a time that's all-too-common for small creative companies. I stepped in, in part, to help with organizational design; building systems and infrastructure to improve the way we do work at the studio. The design of these systems needed to react to COVID-19, which "officially" hit the United States about one month after I joined. Together, our team struggled to figure out how to work effectively in the new environment, my role became the design and maintenance of our communication practices, as well as our relationship with Morisawa, our Osaka-based parent company. In parallel, I work on the design and implementation of tools that support or augment what our designers do. Collaborators: Cyrus Highsmith, June Shin, Cem Eskinazi, Marie Otsuka, Occupant Fonts.

- **Fugitive Images**. I designed and implemented a gradient-based adversarial noise generator for Federico Pérez Villoro and Chris Hamamoto's fall 2019 Residency at OCAT in Shenzhen, China. The tool corrupts input imagery, adding quasi-optimal adversarial noise masks to the imagery such that the fall 2019 weights for Facebook's Detectron2 model fail to correctly detect objects in the image. We studied several kinds of attacks, including obfuscation attacks, that erase `Person` classifications from input images, and confusion attacks, which introduce nonsensical detections into the image. Federico and Chris used the tool to generate imagery for an installation in China, and continue research around Fugitive Images today. Collaborators: Federico Pérez Villoro, Chris Hamamoto.

- **type.tools**. In August of 2019, Cem Eskinazi, Marie Otsuka, and I organized our research on tools for type design in [type.tools](https://type.tools). Currently, type.tools provides a public brand and administrative structure for our research work. Our primary effort is **MILK**, a tool which makes kerning more transparent to designers by providing predicted kerning values and a UI for managing these predictions. type.tools is currently seeking collaborators and funders to help us continue our research. Feel free to contact info@type.tools for more information. Collaborators: Cem Eskinazi, Marie Otsuka.

- **Latent Space**. Federico Pérez Villoro and I wrote a book that dissected a variational autoencoder, and attempted to communicate the underlying concepts in machine learning to an audience with a sensitivity to type design, typography, and letterforms. I designed and implemented a variational autoencoder, trained it on a dataset of letterform images I generated, and developed tools for introspecting the learned model. Our tools included rasterizing subspaces of the models latent space along PCA dimensions, as well as tracking "error flows" – vector fields in latent space generated by mapping the reconstruction error at each point in the latent manifold. I also wrote the central text for the book, which followed an introduction by Federico. Marie Otsuka designed the final book, which was Risograph-printed and bound in Mexico City by Gato Negro Ediciones in 2019. Collaborators: Federico Perez Villoro, Marie Otsuka, Gato Negro Ediciones. Readers: Matt Phillips, Lukas Winklerprins, Mrityunjay Marol, Elizabeth Leeper.

- **PGS Residency**. In 2019, I spent a week in San Francisco helping my friend Matt Philips work on his library-focused startup, Public Good Studio. Public Good Studio is an outsourced R&D shop for libraries which grew out of the Library Innovation Lab at Harvard Law School. from 2017 – 2020, Matt focused on designing and building OpenBooth, a temporary quiet space for busy libraries. For our week together, I designed a curriculum that took us to different libraries around the Bay Area. We interviewed library technology folks, reference librarians, and other staff to get their perspectives on the spatial needs of libraries. In between our interviews, we set up Matt's office space in Menlo Park.

- **MILK**. In 2018, Cem Eskinazi, Marie Otsuka, and I began researching ways of improving the process of kerning typefaces. A familiar task for type designers, kerning involves creating micro adjustments to the spacing between individual glyph pairs in a typeface, a process unique to digital fonts. Kerning is an excessively time-consuming process for several reasons. First, it requires considering adjustments between all pairs of glyph in the typeface, as well as tracking progress through kerning. Our project provides an organizing layer over
to kerning that keeps designers oriented to their progress. It also provides access to a suite of custom machine learning models that provide on-demand kerning predictions based on geometric and spacing data. We hope that combining clear state information about the designer's progress significantly reduces the time and congnitive load invested in kerning. Currently, kerning feels like a very expensive and tiring process for many designers. Our goal is to make it free. Project MILK is currently in a closed alpha with select type foundaries. Feel free to contact info@type.tools for more information. Collaborators: Cem Eskinazi, Marie Otsuka, Ruben Rodriguez, Matt Phillips. Supporters: Morisawa, Cyrus Highsmith, Grilli Type, XYZ Type, DJR Type, Petr Van Blokland.

- **Feedback Loop**. In 2018, Work-Shop partnered with Newport Art Museum to pursue a Knight Foundation Prototype Fund Grant. Our project: to prototype new means for collecting feedback directly in the gallery. We received the grant, and started a yearlong project to play with feedback mechanisms. Our studies attempted to capture many methods for feedback collection, both analog and digital. We also experimented with how voice, tone, and attitude in the questions affected the responses. Along the way, we built up an archive of responses to prompts about several shows at the museum during the spring of 2019, and we met some wonderful collaborators along the way. In early 2020, we placed a Feedback Loop at Broad Art Museum at Michigan State University (not the LA Broad), but we halted deployment due to COVID-19, and the project remains in limbo. Collaborators: Norah Diedrich, Brian Kirschensteiner, Work-Shop, Newport Artmuseum, MSU Broad Art Museum.

- **Newport**. At Work-Shop, Greg and I partnered with the Newport Art Museum to redesign and develop their agin website. We designed a ground-up reboot, working with Merill Allen, the museum's Marketing Director, to update the museum's identity, while running workshops with the entire (small) staff to restructure the museum's information architecture on the web. We also transitioned 30 years of organizational data from an old Raiser's Edge system to a more modern Salesforce NSP instance, which we integrated with the new website's ecommerce transactions. Collaborators: Greg Nemes, Work-Shop, The Newport Art Museum.

- **Winter Light**. Work-Shop designed and built a system of seven network-connected, chair-sized, glowing cubes for the Downtown Providence Parks Conservancy's 2018 Winter Lights Market festival. The cubes respond to weight, lighting up, and sending signals to their neighbors, causing a sparkle of color and light across the network. Collaborators: Greg Nemes, Work-Shop, Downtown Providence Parks Conservancy.

- **Shop 2.0**. In the summer of 2017, I worked with Aaron Hoover at Olin College of Engineering to redesign the identity of their shop spaces. Olin is a young college, but their shop spaces had already become dominated by expert exclusivity: either you already know what you're doing and you're in there doing it, or you don't, and you're not. This created an inadvertent culture of exclusion in the shop, which prevent large sections of the college community from feeling welcome in the space. Together with Aaron and a team of students, we built a new identity for the shop around a shared experience at Olin: the practice piece. Every student at Olin completes a simple practice piece in the shop during their first year: cut a piece of steel bar stock, round it over on the belt sander on one side, and cut a 1/4" hole through it on the drill press. This shared experience became a visual metaphor to tie the Shop together. Collaborators: Aaron Hoover, Christopher Swift, Work-Shop, Olin College of Engineering.
